---
title: Hosting Apocalypse
date: 2008-10-16
layout: post
---

If you run a managed hosting company then your time is officially ‘up’. You
won’t survive the coming hosting Apocalypse. Here’s why.

There are a few companies you may have heard of building large compute grids for
consumption by the general public. They’re calling them their Cloud Computing
products. IBM is building BlueCloud, Microsoft is building the Mesh, Amazon
already has EC2, and Google has AppEngine.  AppEngine is in a slightly different
category than the others and the BlueCloud details are sparse, but they’re still
worth mentioning. Of more immediate interest are Amazon and Microsoft’s
solutions.

Microsoft is currently building their famous 300,000 server Data Center in
Chicago. That’s roughly 3 times the number of servers that Google has. Microsoft
has also announced several other Data center projects - each worth about $500
Million. It’s fair to say that that’s a lot of computing power, and it’s not all
for MSN - Microsoft is planning on providing their platform in the cloud.

The real question is what Amazon will do when the Windows Cloud comes online.
Microsoft has enough money in the bank to provide their 300,000 servers to
customers for *years* without earning a single cent. That implies they can offer
services at super low rates; Low enough to at least compete with Amazon’s EC2,
which will support the Windows Server OS in fall 2008.

What happens with two huge cloud hosting companies get into a price war?

In the interest of self preservation they won’t make their services commodities
- at least right away. But it won’t even matter. When you’re as big as Amazon,
Microsoft, Google or IBM, you can afford to buy servers in such massive
quantities that you could make money selling compute time for 10$ a month. The
hosting space will change forever, because Amazon will eventually drop their
prices by an *order of magnitude* and that has dire implications for the rest of
the Mom’n'Pop hosting companies.

If thousands of companies can’t compete with Microsoft or Amazon on price, and
they can’t compete in terms of convenience, then why would anyone use them? If
you have to buy individual servers, or even servers by the rack, then you’re not
going to get the price you need to be able to compete. You also don’t have
access to the handful of specialized individuals and hardware required to make
things work on such a grand scale.

The only answer is for all the smaller players to band together - to create a
Federated Hosting environment, where together they can provide services that
begin approaching levels of service and power that the Big 4 will offer.

Either way, we’re in an interesting period in the industry. Computing and the
infrastructure of technology has become such a requirement for the economy that
it will eventually become a general utility. The real question is who will be
around.
